---
title: Simple way to profilling python code.
date: 2021-08-28 18:00:00 +07:00
tags: [python, programming]
description: Classic approaches to profile your python code.
useMath: true
---

## Overview


**Profiling lets us find bottlenecks so we can do the least amount of work to get the biggest practical performance gain**. While we'd like to get huge gains in speed and reductions in resource usage with little work, practically you'll aim for your code to run "fast enough" and "lean enough" to fit your needs. Profiling will let you make the most pragmatic decisions for the least overall effort.

If a program is running too slowly or using too much RAM, you'll want to fix whichever parts of your code are responsible. You could, of course, skip profiling and fix what you believe might be the problem—but be wary, as you'll often end up "fix‐ing" the wrong thing. **Rather than using your intuition, it is far more sensible to first profile, having defined a hypothesis, before making changes to the structure of your code.**

> Whatever approach you take to profiling your code, you must remember to have adequate unit test coverage in your code. Unit tests help you to avoid silly mistakes and to keep your results reproducible.

Also, you should know that profiling is in the last steps of software development, and we should'nt worry about writing faster code at the beginning. There is a simple rule for development that I always remember:  

> Make it work \
> Make it right \
> **Make it fast**

## My profilling pipeline

### #1: High level evaluation with cProfile

At this level, we should hypothesize about bottlenecks in the performance of my algorithms. After creating these hypotheses mentally, we must run cProfile commands to get high-level reports. 

Note that cProfile executions must be done with of system's unit tests or functional tests.

```bash
$ python -m cProfile -s cumulative <file>.py
```

To have more control over the generated statistics, we can save them into a file and analyze them in python using the pstats library: 

```bash
$ python -m cProfile -o profile.stats <file>.py
```

Another quite famous visualizer is the **snakeviz** library, that can be used at these stage.

### #2: Line by line analysis

At this step, we must deeply analyze our hypothesis through a line by line analyzer called **line_profiler** 

```bash
$ pip install line_profiler
```

The decorator **@profile**  will execute a line by line analysis of the desired function.

```bash
$ kernprof -l -v <file>.py
```

Finally, if that's the case, we can use **memory_profiler** to evaluate the memory usage of the python code.

```bash
$ pip install memory_profiler psutil
$ python -m memory_profiler <file>.py
```

### #3: Optional: Evaluates Bytecode

A totally optional approach is to  evaluate bytecodes generated by python interpreter. For that, we must use the built-in package **dis** 

```python
import dis
from myapp import myfunc
dis.dis(myfunc)
```

### #4: Unit tests with @profile

Note that your unity test will fail if you uses the @profile decorator. The solution is to add a *no-op* decorator on top of the module.

```python
if 'line_profiler' not in dir() and 'profile' not in dir():
	def profile(func):
		return func
```

### Rule of thumb

> A simple rule of thumb (but one you must back up using profiling!) is that more lines of bytecode will execute more slowly than fewer equivalent lines of bytecode that use built-in functions
